---
layout: project
title: Feedback Control of Bouncing Droplets
date: June 15, 2018
image: public/images/PPOD2.jpg
---

## Overview
Effective control of small liquid volumes drives enabling technology in many important fields that are vital to the well-being and advancement of society including medicine, chemistry, and biology; examples include screening for drug efficacy and interaction, ecological and biological contaminants, and gene expression.

### Project Motivation
A device that can manipulate and characterize small volumes of liquid is known as a lab-on-chip (LoC). LoCs have been developed that pump, meter, mix, and separate liquids with volumetric resolutions on the order of nanoliters. LOC's typically handle liquids continuously or in droplets (digital). Digital devices manipulate droplets by either surrounding them in an immiscible fluid and forcing them along predefined channels or through surface interactions such as electrowetting, surface acoustic waves,or other means that require surface contact. The proposed work will use a recently elucidated phenomenon to manipulate drops without the need for channels,surface coatings, or surface actuators and without the requirement of direct physical contact with the device.

#### HISTORY
The project has been in progress for many years building on the achievements of many individuals each portion of the system is an additional piece to those that came before them. Recent upgrades to the system have left it in a non-functioning state: two new PCs running Windows 10 replace the XP systems along with a new MATLAB version, a new data-acquisition card, and 1 new camera. In its working state, the system was able to acquire high speed images from two cameras (top and side) while moving a surface in space (6 degrees of freedom) along vibratory motions to bounce a droplet without it actually impacting the moving surface. The goal for this project is to first return it to a working state and then transition the system to closed-loop control using vision feedback to move multiple droplets of oil along user-specified trajectories.


#### PROGRESS
If I were given a fresh slate and budget, I would likely design the whole system into a single RTOS controller rather than the "distributed" model that it's currently in. This one controller approach would immensely simplify the issues of synchronization and latency inherent to having 3 PC (2 Windows + 1 Linux) + 2 microcontroller (1 PIC32 from Microchip and 1 Arduino) in a loop, not to mention maintaining code in multiple languages (C, C++, MATLAB, Python). However, like in the real world every project isn't a fresh slate. Ford Motor Company doesn't discontinue all their cars every year and reinvent the car. They take the car from last year, find aspects of the car that would benefit most from a refresh and they work on those things.

As such I am currently focused on bringing the "PPOD2" (6 DoF vibrational manipulator) back online by migrating the old source code written in MATLAB to a functioning state. Admittedly it has been difficult to break the massive code-base into unit-testable pieces since I don't have insight into what expected behavior looks like. The code runs only by calling the top-level program. Before I could get to the expected DAQ errors due to depreciated DAQ toolkits, I had to get the system to run. As of today, I am able to run the code without errors and acquire 20k samples of data from all 24 accelerometers. However, there remains much to do with regards to debugging specifically the synchronization of the AI and AO signals from MATLAB's old techniques to the new since documentation of the old technique is quite limited online. Additionally, the GUI isn't updating, so I will continue to debug this as well.

#### NEXT STEPS
Once I have the control of the PPOD2 back up and running, I will transition to the following tasks:
1. Capture images from two different cameras at different rates based on trigger signals from the PIC32
2. Trigger oil droplet dispense
3. Move the 'oil dropper' to a desired location above the PPOD2 by sending position information to the arduino
4. Design, implement, and test control algorithms using images as input.
